Alternative Imaginaries of AI: Building Narratives of Possible Worlds in Southeast Asia
Moch. Zainul Arifin
Media and Cultural Studies, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Indonesia

Abstract
Big tech companies are starting to look to Southeast Asia for investment in artificial intelligence (AI) technologies. 
Unlike the European Union, Southeast Asia has a different imagination about AI and has taken a business-friendly approach to fostering private sector innovation.
Empirically, I analyze AI national policy documents from five potential regions in Southeast Asia, namely Singapore and Indonesia. 
By operationalizing Ryan's (1991) concept of possible worlds, and Jasanoff and Kim's (2009) concept of sociotechnical imaginaries, 
I investigate how their documents as discourses shape imaginations, developments, sets of rules, and adaptations to construct worlds made possible by AI technologies. 
I employ Fairclough's (2010) critical discourse analysis methodology, which effectively comphrehends the text and ideology under consideration. 
In addition to articulating opportunities to obtain massive investments, I argue that the five contries articulate their AI policies in different regimes, and social and cutural contects. 
In the global landscape, patterns of asserting themselves differently in implementing AI strategies from other countries show alternative imaginaries that can be built by the related region. 

Keywords: artificial intelligence; alternative imaginaries; possible worlds; sociotechnical imaginaries; critical discourse analysis; southeast asia

References
Fairclough, N. 2010. Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical study of language. Pearson Education.
Jasanoff, S., and Sang-Hyun Kim. 2009. "Containing the Atom: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and Nuclear power in the United States and South Korea." Minerva 47(2): 19. doi: 10.1007/s11024-009-9124-4 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. 1999. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative theory. University Bloomington & Indiana Polis Press.

Short biography
Moch. Zainul Arifin is currently a PhD candidate in Media and Cultural Studies at Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. 
He is also a invited reviewer for Journal of Religion, Media and Digital Culture (RMDC), Brill since August 2023. 
Zainul's current research interests deal with datafication and mediatization, new media and religion, surveillance and artificial intelligence, transcultural studies, and literary studies. 
The topic of his PhD project is about China's Datafication and Surveillance Capitalism through virtual assistants in Indonesia. 

